# ActiveStash

ActiveStash is the Rails specific gem for using [CipherStash](https://cipherstash.com).
It provides search functionality for ActiveRecord models
that are configured to use field level encryption (using [Lockbox](https://github.com/ankane/lockbox) or
[EncryptedRecord](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_encryption.html)).
When records are created or updated, they are indexed into a CipherStash collection
which can be queried via an ActiveStash::Relation.

## Getting a workspace

To use `ActiveStash` you need a CipherStash account and workspace.
See our [Getting Started Guide](https://docs.cipherstash.com/tutorials/getting-started/index.html) to get one set up.

## Installation

Add this line to your applications Gemfile:

    gem 'activestash'

And then execute:

    $ bundle install

To use, include ActiveStash::Search in a model:

```ruby
class User < ActiveRecord::Base
  include ActiveStash::Search

  # fields encrypted with EncryptedRecord
  encrypts :name
  encrypts :email
  encrypts :dob

  # ...the rest of your code
end
```

Any model in which you include ActiveStash::Search, will need to have a `stash_id` column added of type `string`.
For example, to add this to the table underlying your `User` model:

```sh
rails g migration AddStashIdToUser stash_id:string
rails db:migrate
```

## Create a CipherStash Collection

Before you can index your models, you need a CipherStash collection. There's a generator for that!

In your rails application:

    rails generate active_stash:schema

This will create an autogenerated schema in `db/stash/<collection-name>.json`. By default,
the name of the collection will be the same as the table used by the model. See below on how to change this.

If you want to tweak or change the indexes are created, you can edit the newly created json file.
Otherwise, go ahead and create the collection using the built in task:

    rails active_stash:create-collections

## (Re)indexing

To index your encrypted data into CipherStash, use the reindex task:

```sh
rails active_stash:reindexall
```

If you want to just reindex one model, for example `User`, run:

```sh
active_stash:reindex[User]
```

You can also reindex in code:

```ruby
User.reindex
```

Depending on how much data you have, reindexing may take a while but you only need to do it once.
*ActiveStash will automatically index (and delete) data as it records are created, updated and deleted.*

## Running Queries

To perform queries over your encrypted records, you can use the `query` method
For example, to find a user by email address:

```ruby
User.query(email: "person@example.com")
```

This will return an ActiveStash::Relation which extends `ActiveRecord::Relation` so you can chain *most* methods
as you normally would!

To constrain by multiple fields, include them in the hash:

```ruby
User.query(email: "person@example.com", verified: true)
```

To order by `dob`, do:

```ruby
User.query(email: "person@example.com).order(:dob)
```
 
Or to use limit and offset:

```ruby
User.query(verified: true).limit(10).offset(20)
```

This means that `ActiveStash` should work with pagination libraries like Kaminari.

You also, don't have to provide any constraints at all and just use the encrypted indexes for ordering!
To order all records by `dob` descending and then `created_at`, do (note the call to query with no args first):

```ruby
User.query.order(dob: :desc, :created_at)
```

### Advanced Queries

More advanced queries can be performed by passing a block to `query`.
For example, to find all users born in or after 1998:

```ruby
User.query { |q| q.dob > "1998-01-01".to_date }
```
      
Or, to perform a free-text search on name:

```ruby
User.query { |q| q.name =~ "Dan" }
```

To combine multiple constraints, make multiple calls in the block:

```ruby
User.query do |q|
  q.dob > "1998-01-01".to_date
  q.name =~ "Dan"
end
```

## Overriding the Collection Name

To set a different collection name, you can set one in your model:

```ruby
class User < ActiveRecord::Base
  include ActiveStash::Search
  self.collection_name = "mycollection"
end
```

## Setting a Default Scope

If you plan to use encrypted queries for all the data in your model, you can set a default scope:

```ruby
class User < ActiveRecord::Base
  include ActiveStash::Search

  def self.default_scope
    ActiveStash::Relation.new(self)
  end
end
```

Now, all queries will use the CipherStash collection, even if you don't call `query`.
For example, this will use encrypted indexes to order:

```ruby
User.order(:dob)

# Without a default scope you'd need to call
User.query.order(:dob)
```

Welcome to your new gem! In this directory, you'll find the files you need to be able to package up your Ruby library into a gem. Put your Ruby code in the file `lib/activestash`. To experiment with that code, run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt.


## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake spec` to run the tests. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and tags, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/cipherstash/activestash. This project is intended to be a safe, welcoming space for collaboration, and contributors are expected to adhere to the [code of conduct](https://github.com/cipherstash/activestash/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).


## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

## Code of Conduct

Everyone interacting in the Activestash project's codebases, issue trackers, chat rooms and mailing lists is expected to follow the [code of conduct](https://github.com/cipherstash/activestash/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).
